# Lobster-scuba-data
## Background
Lobster recruitment SCUBA surveys have been conducted at various sites in coastal lobster habitat in the southern Gulf of St. Lawrence (sGSL) since 2000. Sites have been added and removed over the years and the current monitoring plan includes nine sites along the coast, from Pointe-Verte, New Brunswick in the northwest to Toney River, Nova Scotia in the southeast.

## Methods
### Survey design
The SCUBA survey was designed with the objective of assessing the density of lobsters (1-3 years of age) in rocky reefs, within diveable depths (i.e. <10 m of water depth). As such, rocky reefs were identified using ship-based seafloor mapping (i.e. Olex) and local knowledge from biologists and harvesters. Identified areas were then ground-truthed by SCUBA divers and underwater photography. From this initial selection of study sites, a minimum of three 100 m long transects were distributed systematically or randomly within rocky reefs. Over the years, transects have been added and removed due to financial or personnel limitations, changes in research objectives (e.g. specific regions of interest), if SCUBA diving could not be completed at the site safely and efficiently, if the substrate was assessed as poor lobster habitat (e.g. sand) or if the substrate was assessed as too complex for divers to find and capture all lobsters (e.g. too much algae). The transects were largely oriented parallel to tidal currents to facilitate SCUBA diving and improve visibility, which results in transects running generally parallel to the shore. 

Prior to the 2019 field season, the sampling plan was re-configured to even out the sampling and have a minimum of 5 transects per monitoring site. Ten and 12 transects in Cocagne and Caraquet were retained, respectively, as these two sites have long timelines and, in the past, have been thought to be good indicators of lobster densities generally in the southern Gulf of St. Lawrence. In all, a total of over 280 transects have been sampled at one time or another between 2000 and 2018. From these, 57 transects at 9 sites were selected for ongoing monitoring. Transects were selected for ongoing monitoring at each of the 9 sites based on those that had the longest time series, the fewest interruptions (i.e. missed years of sampling) and had been surveyed in recent years. In Caraquet, shallower transects were selected over deeper transects for ease of diving. 

### Field methods
Transects are laid-out from a small vessel using buoys, anchors, and a 100 m leaded rope along the bottom, marked at 5 m intervals.  A strip transect survey method is used. From 2000 to 2018, two divers sampled each transect by swimming along either side of the rope and surveying a 4 m-wide strip (i.e. 2 m on either side of the rope). Due to very high lobster densities, starting in 2019, a strip width of 2 m or 4 m will be used, depending on the previous year’s results for each site. Regions with an average density of ≥0.5 lobster/m2 will be sampled with a 2 m strip (1 m on either side of the center line) and regions with an average density <0.5 lobster/ m2 will be sampled with a 4 m strip (2 m on either side of the center line). 

Observations will be recorded in 5 m-long sections along the 100 m transects, in a 2 m or 4 m strip. Within each diver’s strip width (either 1 m or 2 m), all captured lobster will be measured (carapace length) and all lobsters of ≥20 mm CL will be sexed. The complexity and suitability of the habitat will also be assessed in the 5 m sections (e.g. rocky reefs, sand, large boulders).  Habitats that are too complex to sample completely (i.e. without missing lobster) or safely (e.g. large boulders or deep crevices) will be marked on the data sheet, skipped over and not included in further analysis. All other areas will be sampled. 

Prior to 2019, the full 100 m length of each transect was not necessarily surveyed. For example, as increasing lobster densities increased the time needed to complete transects, divers generally completed two dives per transect and stopped, regardless of how much of the transect was sampled. This led to reductions in the swept area of transects as lobster densities increased in the sGSL. In addition, areas of poorer lobster habitat (e.g. sand) were sometimes marked on sample sheets and skipped over by divers. Starting in 2019, the field sampling goal is to complete the full 100 m transect whenever possible, regardless of the number of dives needed or the habitat encountered.

As a rule-of-thumb, if, after a dive, the area remaining on the transect is less than that which would be completed in half a dive, the remainder of the transect will be abandoned. For example, if, after two dives, 80 m of a transect is completed (average of 40 m per dive), divers would complete a third dive to finish the remainder of the transect (20 m). If, however, after two dives, 85 m or more of a transect was completed, divers would not necessarily complete a third dive for the remaining 15 m. At all times, divers will only dive when it is safe to do so, in terms of diver availability (divers ready and willing to dive) and environmental conditions. 

Divers will not deviate from their strip along the weighted line marking the center of the strip width. At all times the individual diver’s strip width (i.e. 1 m or 2 m) will be respected with divers using their wingspread or a 1 m line to mark out the sample area. For areas where a 1 m strip will be sampled on either side of the weighted line, divers will coordinate so that they are slightly staggered on the line to maintain better visibility (Figure 3). This will allow divers to remain within a safe distance of each other (i.e. buddy system) while having enough area to work in. Divers should scan ahead as they complete their work to avoid sampling lobsters that are attracted by the sampling activity. For example, lobsters that were originally outside of the sample area but approach the diver should not be sampled.  

### Data configuration
This an attempt to configure the data prior to 2019 in a comprehensive and consistent manner. Data from 2019 have been used to construct the data entry application and a template has been provided to coerce the historical data in order to complete the new database. 

## Authors 
Éliane Aubry
Natalie Asselin
Tobie Surette
Denis Gagnon
